#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass linuxdoc
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title
\added_space_top vfill 
Check Tutorial
\layout Author

Arien Malec
\layout Date

11 July, 2001
\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \tableofcontents{}

\end_inset 

Copyright (c) 2001 Arien Malec.
 Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
 the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or any later
 version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections,
 with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts.
 A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentati
on License".
\layout Section

Introduction
\layout Standard

Check is a unit testing framework for C.
 It was inspired by similar frameworks that currently exist for most programming
 languages; the most famous example being JUnit for Java (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.junit.org]{http://www.junit.org}

\end_inset 

).
 There is a list of unit test frameworks for multiple languages at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.xprogramming.com/software.htm]{http://www.xprogramming.com/software.htm}

\end_inset 

.
 Unit testing has a long history as part of formal quality assurance methodologi
es, but has recently been associated with the lightweight methodology called
 Extreme Programming.
 In that methodology, the characteristic practice involves interspersing
 unit test writing with coding (
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

test a little, code a little
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

).
 While the incremental unit test/code approach is indispensable to Extreme
 Programming, it is also applicable, and perhaps indispensable, outside
 of that methodology.
\layout Standard

The incremental test/code approach provides three main benefits to the developer
:
\layout Enumerate

Because the unit tests use the interface to the unit being tested, they
 allow the developer to think about how the interface should be designed
 for usage early in the coding process.
\layout Enumerate

They help the developer think early about aberrant cases, and code accordingly.
\layout Enumerate

By providing a documented level of correctness, they allow the developer
 to refactor (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.refactoring.com]{http://www.refactoring.com}

\end_inset 

) aggressively.
\layout Standard

That third reason is the one that turns people into unit testing addicts.
 There is nothing so satisfying as doing a wholesale replacement of an implement
ation, and having the unit tests reassure you at each step of that change
 that all is well.
 It is like the difference between exploring the wilderness with and without
 a good map and compass: without the proper gear, you are more likely to
 proceed cautiously and stick to the marked trails; with it, you can take
 the most direct path to where you want to go.
\layout Standard

Look at the Check homepage for the latest information on Check: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[http://check.sourceforge.net]{http://check.sourceforge.net}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The Check project page is at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[http://sourceforge.net/projects/check/]{http://sourceforge.net/projects/check/}

\end_inset 


\layout Section

Unit testing in C
\layout Standard

The approach to unit testing frameworks used for Check originated with Smalltalk
, which is a late binding object-oriented language supporting reflection.
 Writing a framework for C requires solving some special problems that framework
s for Smalltalk, Java or Python don't have to face.
 In all of those language, the worst that a unit test can do is fail miserably,
 throwing an exception of some sort.
 In C, a unit test is just as likely to trash its address space as it is
 to fail to meet its test requirements, and if the test framework sits in
 the same address space, goodbye test framework.
 To solve this problem, Check uses to fork system call to create a new address
 space in which to run each unit test, and then uses message queues to send
 information on the testing process back to the test framework.
 That way, your unit test can do all sorts of nasty things with pointers,
 and throw a segmentation fault, and the test framework will happily note
 a unit test error, and chug along.
\layout Standard

The Check framework is also designed to play happily with common development
 environments for C programming.
 The author designed Check around Autoconf/Automake (thus the name Check
 -- make check is the idiom used for testing with Autoconf/Automake), and
 the test failure messages thrown up by Check use the common idiom of filename:l
inenumber:message used by gcc and family to report problems in source code.
 With (X)Emacs, the output of Check allows one to quickly navigate to the
 location of the unit test that failed; presumably that also works in VI
 and IDEs.
\layout Subsection

Other unit testing frameworks for C
\layout Standard

The author knows of the following additional unit testing frameworks for
 C:
\layout Description

GNU\SpecialChar ~
Autounit Much along the same lines as Check, including forking to run
 unit tests in a separate address space (in fact, the author of Check stole
 the idea from GNU Autounit).
 GNU Autounit uses GLib extensively, which means that linking and such need
 special options, but this may not be a big problem to you, especially if
 you are already using GTK or GLib.
 See 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[http://www.recursism.com/projects/autounit/]{http://www.recursism.com/projects/autounit/}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Description

cUnit Also uses GLib, but does not fork to protect the address space of
 unit tests.
 See 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[http://people.codefactory.se/~spotty/cunit/]{http://people.codefactory.se/~spotty/cunit/}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Description

CUnit Standard C, with plans for an Win32 GUI implementation.
 Does not currently fork or otherwise protect the address space of unit
 tests.
 In early development.
 See 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[http://cunit.sourceforge.net]{http://cunit.sourceforge.net}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

It is the author's considered opinion that forking or otherwise trapping
 and reporting signals is indispensable for unit testing (but it probably
 wouldn't be hard to add that to cUnit or CUnit).
 Try 'em all out: adapt this tutorial to use all of the frameworks above,
 and use whichever you like.
 Contribute, spread the word, and make one a standard.
 Languages such as Java and Python are fortunate to have standard unit test
 frameworks; it would be desirable that C have one as well.
\layout Section

Tutorial: Basic unit testing
\layout Standard

This tutorial will use the JUnit Test Infected article (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[Test Infected]{http://members.pingnet.ch/gamma/junit.htm}

\end_inset 

) as a starting point.
 We will be creating a library to represent money, allowing conversions
 between different currency types.
 The development style will be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

test a little, code a little
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 with unit test writing preceding coding.
 This constantly gives us insights into module usage, and also makes sure
 we are constantly thinking about how to test our code.
\layout Subsection

How to write a test
\layout Standard

Test writing using Check is very simple.
 The file in which the checks are defined must import check.h as so:
\layout Code

#import <check.h>
\layout Standard

The basic unit test looks as follows:
\layout Code

START_TEST(test_name)
\layout Code

{
\layout Code

  /* unit test code */
\layout Code

}
\layout Code

END_TEST
\layout Standard

The START_TEST/END_TEST pair are macros that setup basic structures to permit
 testing.
 It is a mistake to leave off the END_TEST marker; doing so produces all
 sorts of strange errors when the check is compiled.
 
\layout Subsection

Setting up the money tests
\layout Standard

Since we are creating a library to handle money, we will first create a
 header money.h, and a file to contain our unit tests, check_money.c (there
 is a pun there, but no matter...).
 To manage everything we'll use Autoconf/Automake for this example.
 (One could do something similar with ordinary makefiles, but in the author's
 opinion, it is generally easier to use Autoconf/Automake than bare makefiles,
 and it provides built-in support for running tests).
 Here is the Makefile.am:
\layout Code

TESTS=check_money
\layout Code

noinst_PROGRAMS=check_money
\layout Code

check_money_SOURCES=  money.h money.c check_money.c
\layout Code

check_money_INCLUDES= @CHECK_CFLAGS@
\layout Code

check_money_LIBS= @CHECK_LIBS@
\layout Standard

Special mumbojumbo to use in configure.in is:
\layout Code

AM_PATH_CHECK()
\layout Standard

This will ensure that things link up properly with Check by defining the
 appropriate compiler and linker flags as CHECK_CFLAGS and CHECK_LIBS.
 It also makes sure that we can only compile in an environment that has
 Check.
 The money.h header should only contain the standard #ifndef MONEY_H stuff,
 money.c should be empty, and check_money.c should only contain an empty main
 function.
 Run this with make -k check, after going through the setups to get autoconf
 and friends working.
 If all goes well, make should report that our tests passed.
 No surprise, because there aren't any tests to fail.
\layout Standard

The AM_PATH_CHECK() macro is defined in the file check.m4 which is installed
 by Check.
 If you see warnings from automake or aclocal this most certainly means
 that you forgot to call aclocal or that aclocal can't find check.m4.
 AM_PATH_CHECK() has some optional parameters that you might find useful:
\layout Code

AM_PATH_CHECK([MINIMUM-VERSION,[ACTION-IF-FOUND[,ACTION-IF-NOT-FOUND]]])
\layout Code

\layout Subsection

Test a little, code a little
\layout Standard

The Test Infected article starts out with a Money class, and so will we.
 Of course, we can't do classes with C, but we don't really need to.
 The Test Infected approach to writing code says that we should write the
 unit test 
\emph on 
before
\emph default 
 we write the code, and in this, we will be even more dogmatic and doctrinaire
 than the authors of Test Infected (who clearly don't really get this stuff,
 only being some of the originators of the Patterns approach to software
 development and OO design).
\layout Standard

Here is our first unit test:
\layout Code

START_TEST(test_create) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

 Money *m; 
\layout Code

 m = money_create (5, "USD");
\layout Code

 fail_unless (money_amount(m) == 5, 
\layout Code

              "Amount not set correctly on creation");
\layout Code

 fail_unless (strcmp(money_currency(m),"USD") == 0, 
\layout Code

              "Currency not set correctly on creation"); 
\layout Code

 money_free(m); 
\layout Code

}
\layout Code

END_TEST
\layout Standard

A unit test should just chug along and complete.
 If it exits early, or is signaled, it will fail with a generic error message.
 (Note: it is conceivable that you expect an early exit, or a signal.
 There is currently nothing in Check to specifically assert that we should
 expect either -- if that is valuable, it may be worth while adding to Check).
 If we want to get some information about what failed, we need to use the
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

fail_unless
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 function.
 The 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

fail_unless
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 function (actually a macro) takes a first Boolean argument, and an error
 message to send if the condition is not true.
 If the Boolean argument is too complicated to elegantly express within
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

fail_unless
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

, there is an alternate function 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

fail
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

, that unconditionally fails.
 The second test above can be rewritten as follows:
\layout Code

if (strcmp(money_currency(m), "USD") != 0) {
\layout Code

  fail ("Currency not set correctly on creation");
\layout Code

}
\layout Standard

When we try to compile and run the test suite now, we get a whole host of
 compilation errors.
 It may seem a bit strange to deliberately write code that won't compile,
 but notice what we are doing: in creating the unit test, we are also defining
 requirements for the money interface.
 Compilation errors are, in a way, unit test failures of their own, telling
 us that the implementation does not match the specification.
 If all we do is edit the sources so that the unit test compiles, we are
 actually making progress, guided by the unit tests, so that's what we will
 now do.
\layout Standard

We will add the following to our header money.h:
\layout Code

typedef struct Money Money;
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

Money *money_create(int amount, char *currency); 
\layout Code

int money_amount (Money *m); 
\layout Code

char *money_currency (Money *m); 
\layout Code

void money_free(Money *m);
\layout Standard

and our code now compiles, but fails to link, since we haven't implemented
 any of the functions.
 Let's do that now, creating stubs for all of the functions:
\layout Code

#include <stdlib.h> 
\layout Code

#include "money.h"
\layout Code

Money *money_create(int amount, char *currency) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

  return NULL; 
\layout Code

}
\layout Code

int money_amount (Money *m) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

  return 0; 
\layout Code

}
\layout Code

char *money_currency (Money *m) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

  return NULL; 
\layout Code

}
\layout Code

void money_free(Money *m) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

  return; 
\layout Code

}
\layout Standard

Now, everything compiles, and we still pass all our tests.
 How can that be??? Of course -- we haven't run any of our tests yet....
\layout Subsection

Creating a suite
\layout Standard

To run unit tests with Check, we must create some test cases, aggregate
 them into a suite, and run them with a suite runner.
 That's a bit of overhead, but it is mostly one-off.
 Here's the code in check_money.c:
\layout Code

Suite *money_suite (void) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

  Suite *s = suite_create("Money"); 
\layout Code

  TCase *tc_core = tcase_create("Core");
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

  suite_add_tcase (s, tc_core);
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

  tcase_add_test (tc_core, test_create); 
\layout Code

  return s; 
\layout Code

}
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

int main (void) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

  int nf; 
\layout Code

  Suite *s = money_suite(); 
\layout Code

  SRunner *sr = srunner_create(s); 
\layout Code

  srunner_run_all (sr, CK_NORMAL); 
\layout Code

  nf = srunner_ntests_failed(sr); 
\layout Code

  srunner_free(sr); 
\layout Code

  suite_free(s); 
\layout Code

  return (nf == 0) ? EXIT_SUCCESS : EXIT_FAILURE; 
\layout Code

}
\layout Standard

Most of the money_suite code should be self-explanatory.
 We are creating a suite, creating a test case, adding the test case to
 the suite, and adding the unit test we created above to the test case.
 Why separate this off into a separate function, rather than inlining it
 in main? Because any new tests will get added in money_suite, but nothing
 will need to change in main for the rest of this example, so main will
 stay relatively clean and simple.
\layout Standard

Unit tests are internally defined as static functions.
 This means that the code to add unit tests to test cases must be in the
 same compilation unit as the unit tests themselves.
 This provides another reason to put the creation of the test suite in a
 separate function: you may later want to keep one source file per suite;
 defining a uniquely named suite creation function allows you later to define
 a header file giving prototypes for all the suite creation functions, and
 encapsulate the details of where and how unit tests are defined behind
 those functions.
 See the test program defined for Check itself for an example of this strategy.
\layout Standard

The code in main bears some explanation.
 We are creating a suite runner object from the suite we created in money_suite.
 We then run the suite, using the CK_NORMAL flag to specify that we should
 print a summary of the run, and list any failures that may have occurred.
 We capture the number of failures that occurred during the run, and use
 that to decide how to return.
 The check target created by Automake uses the return value to decide whether
 the tests passed or failed.
\layout Subsection

SRunner output
\layout Standard

The function to run tests in an SRunner is defined as follows:
\layout Code

void srunner_run_all (SRunner *sr, enum print_output print_mode);
\layout Standard

This function does two things:
\layout Enumerate

Runs all of the unit tests for all of the test cases defined for all of
 the suites in the SRunner, and collects the results in the SRunner
\layout Enumerate

Prints the results according to the print mode specified
\layout Standard

For SRunners that have already been run, there is also a separate printing
 function defined as follows:
\layout Code

void srunner_print (SRunner *sr, enum print_output print_mode);
\layout Standard

The enumeration values defined in Check to control print output are as follows:
\layout Description

CK_SILENT Specifies that no output is to be generated.
 If you use this flag, you either need to programmatically examine the SRunner
 object, print separately, or use test logging (described below: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{test_logging}

\end_inset 

).
\layout Description

CK_MINIMAL Only a summary of the test run will be printed (number run, passed,
 failed, errors).
\layout Description

CK_NORMAL Prints the summary of the run, and prints one message per failed
 tests.
\layout Description

CK_VERBOSE Prints the summary, and one message per test (passed or failed)
\layout Standard

With the CK_NORMAL flag specified, let's rerun make check now.
 We get the following satisfying output:
\layout Code

Running suite(s): Money 
\layout Code

0%: Checks: 1, Failures: 1, Errors: 0 
\layout Code

check_money.c:9:F:Core: Amount not set correctly on creation
\layout Standard

The first number in the summary line tells us that 0% of our tests passed,
 and the rest of the line tells us that there was one check, and one failure.
 The next line tells us exactly where that failure occurred, what kind of
 failure it was (P for pass, F for failure, E for error).
\layout Standard

Let's implement the money_amount function, so that it will pass its tests.
 We first have to create a Money structure to hold the amount:
\layout Code

struct Money { 
\layout Code

  int amount; 
\layout Code

};
\layout Standard

Then we will implement the money_amount function to return the correct amount:
\layout Code

int money_amount (Money *m) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

  return m->amount;
\layout Code

}
\layout Standard

We will now rerun make check and...
 What's this? The output is now as follows:
\layout Code

Running suite(s): Money 
\layout Code

0%: Checks: 1, Failures: 0, Errors: 1 
\layout Code

check_money.c:5:E:Core: (after this point) Received signal 11
\layout Standard

What does this mean? Note that we now have an error, rather than a failure.
 This means that our unit test either exited early, or was signaled.
 Next note that the failure message says 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

after this point
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 This means that somewhere after the point noted (check_money.c, line 5)
 there was a problem: signal 11 (AKA segmentation fault).
 The last point reached is set on entry to the unit test, and after every
 call to fail_unless, fail, or the special function mark_point.
 E.g., if we wrote some test code as follows:
\layout Code

stuff_that_works();
\layout Code

mark_point();
\layout Code

stuff_that_dies();
\layout Standard

then the point returned will be that marked by mark_point.
\layout Standard

The reason our test failed so horribly is that we haven't implemented money_crea
te to create any money.
 Go ahead and implement that, and money_currency, to make the unit tests
 pass.
\layout Section

Advanced Features
\layout Subsection

Running multiple cases
\layout Standard

What happens if we pass -1 as the amount in money_create? What should happen?
 Let's write a unit test.
 Since we are testing limits, we should also test what happens when we create
 money with amount 0:
\layout Code

START_TEST(test_neg_create) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

  Money *m = money_create(-1, "USD"); 
\layout Code

  fail_unless (m == NULL, "NULL should be returned on attempt to create
 with a negative amount"); 
\layout Code

} 
\layout Code

END_TEST
\layout Code

START_TEST(test_zero_create) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

  Money *m = money_create(0, "USD"); 
\layout Code

  fail_unless (money_amount(m) == 0, "Zero is a valid amount of money");
 
\layout Code

} 
\layout Code

END_TEST
\layout Standard

Let's put these in a separate test case, called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Limits
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 so that money_suite looks like so:
\layout Code

Suite *money_suite (void) { 
\layout Code

  Suite *s = suite_create("Money"); 
\layout Code

  TCase *tc_core = tcase_create("Core"); 
\layout Code

  TCase *tc_limits = tcase_create("Limits"); 
\layout Code

  suite_add_tcase (s, tc_core); 
\layout Code

  suite_add_tcase (s, tc_limits); 
\layout Code

  tcase_add_test (tc_core, test_create); 
\layout Code

  tcase_add_test (tc_limits, test_neg_create); 
\layout Code

  tcase_add_test (tc_limits, test_zero_create); 
\layout Code

  return s; 
\layout Code

}
\layout Standard

Now we can rerun our suite, and fix the problem(s).
 Note that errors in the Core test case will be reported as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Core
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 and errors in the Limits test case will be reported as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Limits,
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 giving you additional information about where things broke.
\layout Subsection

No fork mode
\layout Standard

Check normally forks to create a separate address space.
 This allows a signal or early exit to be caught and reported, rather than
 taking down the entire test program, and is normally very useful.
 However, when you are trying to debug why the segmentation fault or other
 program error occurred, forking makes it difficult to use debugging tools.
 To define fork mode for an SRunner object, you can do one of the following:
\layout Enumerate

Define the CK_FORK environment variable to equal 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

no
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
\layout Enumerate

Explicitly define the fork status through the use of the following function:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Code

void srunner_set_fork_status (SRunner *sr, enum fork_status fstat); 
\end_deeper 
\layout Standard

The enum fork_status defines the following values: CK_FORK and CK_NOFORK.
\layout Standard

The explicit definition overrides the environment variable.
\layout Subsection

Test fixtures
\layout Standard

We may want multiple tests that all use the same Money.
 In such cases, rather than setting up and tearing down objects for each
 unit test, it may be convenient to add some setup that is constant across
 all the tests in a test case.
 In the extreme programming approach to unit tests, such setup is called
 a test fixture.
\layout Standard

A fixture is created by defining a setup and/or a teardown function, and
 associating it with a test case.
 There are two kinds of test fixtures in Check: checked and unchecked fixtures.
 These are defined as follows:
\layout Description

Checked\SpecialChar ~
fixtures are run inside the address space created by the fork to
 create the unit test.
 Before each unit test, the setup function is run, if defined.
 After each unit test, the teardown function is run, if defined.
 Because they run inside the forked address space, if checked fixtures signal
 or otherwise fail, they will be caught and reported by the SRunner.
\layout Description

Unchecked\SpecialChar ~
fixtures are run before and after the run of unit tests for a test
 case.
 They may use the fail functions, but may not signal or exit, since they
 are run in the same address space as the test program.
\layout Subsubsection

Test fixture examples
\layout Standard

We create a test fixture in Check as follows:
\layout Enumerate

Define the global variables, and functions to setup and teardown the globals.
 The functions both take void and return void
\begin_deeper 
\layout Code

Money *five_dollars; 
\layout Code

void setup (void) { 
\layout Code

  five_dollars = money_create(5, "USD"); 
\layout Code

}
\layout Code

\layout Code

void teardown (void) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

  money_free (five_dollars); 
\layout Code

}
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Add the setup and teardown functions to the test case with 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

tcase_add_checked_fixture
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 (this belongs in the suite setup function 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

money_suite
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Code

tcase_add_checked_fixture (tc_core, setup, teardown);
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

We can now rewrite the first test we wrote as follows:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Code

START_TEST(test_create) 
\layout Code

{ 
\layout Code

   fail_unless (money_amount(five_dollars) == 5,
\layout Code

               "Amount not set correctly on creation"); 
\layout Code

   fail_unless (strcmp(money_currency(five_dollars),"USD") == 0,
\layout Code

                "Currency not set correctly on creation"); 
\layout Code

} 
\layout Code

END_TEST
\end_deeper 
\layout Subsubsection

Checked vs Unchecked fixtures
\layout Standard

Because checked fixtures run once per unit test, they should not be used
 for expensive setup.
 Because unchecked fixtures may take down the entire test program, they
 should only be used if they are known to be safe.
\layout Standard

Additionally, checked and uncheck fixtures may behave differently in CK_NOFORK
 mode.
 Because the fork creates a separate address space, in CK_FORK mode unit
 tests may abuse the objects created in an unchecked fixture with impunity,
 without affecting other unit tests in the same test case.
 However, in CK_NOFORK mode, all tests live in the same address space, and
 side effects in one test will affect the unchecked fixture for other tests.
 A checked fixture, however, will generally not be affected by unit test
 side effects, since the setup is run before each unit test.
 (There is an exception for side effects to the total environment in which
 the test program lives: e.g., if the setup function initializes a file that
 a unit test then changes, the combination of the teardown function and
 setup fuction must be able to restore the environment for the next unit
 test).
\layout Standard

If the setup function in a fixture fails, in either checked or unchecked
 fixtures, the unit tests for the test case, and the teardown function for
 the fixture will not be run.
 A fixture error will be created and reported to the SRunner.
\layout Subsection

Multiple suites run through the same SRunner
\layout Standard

In a large program, it will be convenient to create multiple suites, each
 testing a module of the program.
 While one can create several test programs, each running one Suite, it
 may be convenient to create one main test program, and use it to run multiple
 suites.
 The Check test suite provides an example of how to do this.
 The main testing program is called check_check, and has a header file that
 declares suite creation functions for all the module tests:
\layout Code

Suite *make_sub_suite(void);
\layout Code

Suite *make_sub2_suite(void);
\layout Code

Suite *make_master_suite(void);
\layout Code

Suite *make_list_suite(void);
\layout Code

Suite *make_msg_suite(void);
\layout Code

Suite *make_log_suite(void);
\layout Standard

The function srunner_add_suite is used to add additional suites to an SRunner.
 Here is the code to setup and run the SRunner in the main function:
\layout Code

SRunner *sr;
\layout Code

sr = srunner_create (make_master_suite());
\layout Code

srunner_add_suite(sr, make_list_suite());
\layout Code

srunner_add_suite(sr, make_msg_suite());
\layout Code

srunner_add_suite(sr, make_log_suite()); 
\layout Subsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{test_logging}

\end_inset 

Test Logging
\layout Standard

Check supports operation to log the results of a test run.
 To use test logging, use the srunner_set_log function with the name of
 the log file you wish to create:
\layout Code

SRunner *sr;
\layout Code

sr = srunner_create(make_s1_suite());
\layout Code

srunner_add_suite(sr, make_s2_suite());
\layout Code

srunner_set_log(sr, "test.log");
\layout Code

srunner_run_all(sr, CRNORMAL);
\layout Standard

Check will write the results of the run to test.log.
 The printmode argument to srunner_run_all does not apply to test logging;
 the log will contain a result entry, organized by suite, for every test
 run .
 Here is an example of test log output:
\layout Code

Running suite S1 
\layout Code

ex_log_output.c:7:P:Core: Test passed
\layout Code

ex_log_output.c:13:F:Core: Failure
\layout Code

ex_log_output.c:17:E:Core: (after this point) Early exit with return value
 1
\layout Code

Running suite S2 
\layout Code

ex_log_output.c:25:P:Core: Test passed
\layout Code

Results for all suites run:
\layout Code

50%: Checks: 4, Failures: 1, Errors: 1
\layout Subsection

Conclusion
\layout Standard

This tutorial has provided an introduction to all of the functionality available
 in Check.
 Hopefully, this is enough to get you started writing unit tests with Check.
 All the rest is simply application of what has been learned in the tutorial
 through multiple repetitions of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

test a little, code a little.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\layout Section

GNU Free Documentation License 
\layout Standard

Version 1.1, March 2000
\layout Standard

Copyright (C) 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA Everyone is permitted
 to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing
 it is not allowed.
\layout Standard

0.
 PREAMBLE
\layout Standard

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other written
 document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone the effective
 freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without modifying it, either
 commercially or noncommercially.
 Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way
 to get credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
 modifications made by others.
\layout Standard

This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative works
 of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.
 It complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft license
 designed for free software.
\layout Standard

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free software,
 because free software needs free documentation: a free program should come
 with manuals providing the same freedoms that the software does.
 But this License is not limited to software manuals; it can be used for
 any textual work, regardless of subject matter or whether it is published
 as a printed book.
 We recommend this License principally for works whose purpose is instruction
 or reference.
\layout Standard

1.
 APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
\layout Standard

This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a notice
 placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed under the terms
 of this License.
 The "Document", below, refers to any such manual or work.
 Any member of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you".
\layout Standard

A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the Document
 or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or
 translated into another language.
\layout Standard

A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the
 Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers
 or authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject (or to related
 matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly within that overall
 subject.
 (For example, if the Document is in part a textbook of mathematics, a Secondary
 Section may not explain any mathematics.) The relationship could be a matter
 of historical connection with the subject or with related matters, or of
 legal, commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
 them.
\layout Standard

The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are
 designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that says
 that the Document is released under this License.
\layout Standard

The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed, as
 Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the
 Document is released under this License.
\layout Standard

A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy, represented
 in a format whose specification is available to the general public, whose
 contents can be viewed and edited directly and straightforwardly with generic
 text editors or (for images composed of pixels) generic paint programs
 or (for drawings) some widely available drawing editor, and that is suitable
 for input to text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety
 of formats suitable for input to text formatters.
 A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file format whose markup has been
 designed to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by readers is
 not Transparent.
 A copy that is not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".
\layout Standard

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII
 without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML using
 a publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple HTML designed
 for human modification.
 Opaque formats include PostScript, PDF, proprietary formats that can be
 read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which
 the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally available, and the machine-ge
nerated HTML produced by some word processors for output purposes only.
\layout Standard

The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus
 such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this
 License requires to appear in the title page.
 For works in formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title Page"
 means the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
 preceding the beginning of the body of the text.
\layout Standard

2.
 VERBATIM COPYING
\layout Standard

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially
 or noncommercially, provided that this License, the copyright notices,
 and the license notice saying this License applies to the Document are
 reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other conditions whatsoever
 to those of this License.
 You may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or
 further copying of the copies you make or distribute.
 However, you may accept compensation in exchange for copies.
 If you distribute a large enough number of copies you must also follow
 the conditions in section 3.
\layout Standard

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you
 may publicly display copies.
\layout Standard

3.
 COPYING IN QUANTITY
\layout Standard

If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than 100, and
 the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the
 copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts:
 Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the back
 cover.
 Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify you as the publisher
 of these copies.
 The front cover must present the full title with all words of the title
 equally prominent and visible.
 You may add other material on the covers in addition.
 Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve the
 title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim
 copying in other respects.
\layout Standard

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly,
 you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the
 actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent pages.
\layout Standard

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more
 than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along
 with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a publicly-accessib
le computer-network location containing a complete Transparent copy of the
 Document, free of added material, which the general network-using public
 has access to download anonymously at no charge using public-standard network
 protocols.
 If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when
 you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this
 Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location until
 at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque copy (directly
 or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to the public.
\layout Standard

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document
 well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give them a chance
 to provide you with an updated version of the Document.
\layout Standard

4.
 MODIFICATIONS
\layout Standard

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the
 conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified
 Version under precisely this License, with the Modified Version filling
 the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution and modification
 of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it.
 In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:
\layout Standard

A.
 Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from
 that of the Document, and from those of previous versions (which should,
 if there were any, be listed in the History section of the Document).
 You may use the same title as a previous version if the original publisher
 of that version gives permission.
 B.
 List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities responsible
 for authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version, together with
 at least five of the principal authors of the Document (all of its principal
 authors, if it has less than five).
 C.
 State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified Version,
 as the publisher.
 D.
 Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
 E.
 Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to
 the other copyright notices.
 F.
 Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice giving
 the public permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of this
 License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
 G.
 Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and
 required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
 H.
 Include an unaltered copy of this License.
 I.
 Preserve the section entitled "History", and its title, and add to it an
 item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the
 Modified Version as given on the Title Page.
 If there is no section entitled "History" in the Document, create one stating
 the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as given on its
 Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified Version as stated
 in the previous sentence.
 J.
 Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for public
 access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network
 locations given in the Document for previous versions it was based on.
 These may be placed in the "History" section.
 You may omit a network location for a work that was published at least
 four years before the Document itself, or if the original publisher of
 the version it refers to gives permission.
 K.
 In any section entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications", preserve the
 section's title, and preserve in the section all the substance and tone
 of each of the contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.
 L.
 Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their
 text and in their titles.
 Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered part of the section
 titles.
 M.
 Delete any section entitled "Endorsements".
 Such a section may not be included in the Modified Version.
 N.
 Do not retitle any existing section as "Endorsements" or to conflict in
 title with any Invariant Section.
\layout Standard

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices
 that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from
 the Document, you may at your option designate some or all of these sections
 as invariant.
 To do this, add their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the Modified
 Version's license notice.
 These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.
\layout Standard

You may add a section entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains nothing
 but endorsements of your Modified Version by various parties--for example,
 statements of peer review or that the text has been approved by an organization
 as the authoritative definition of a standard.
\layout Standard

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a passage
 of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover
 Texts in the Modified Version.
 Only one passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be
 added by (or through arrangements made by) any one entity.
 If the Document already includes a cover text for the same cover, previously
 added by you or by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on
 behalf of, you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on
 explicit permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.
\layout Standard

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give
 permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorseme
nt of any Modified Version.
\layout Standard

5.
 COMBINING DOCUMENTS
\layout Standard

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this License,
 under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified versions, provided
 that you include in the combination all of the Invariant Sections of all
 of the original documents, unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections
 of your combined work in its license notice.
\layout Standard

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple
 identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy.
 If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but different
 contents, make the title of each such section unique by adding at the end
 of it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or publisher of
 that section if known, or else a unique number.
 Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of Invariant
 Sections in the license notice of the combined work.
\layout Standard

In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled "History" in
 the various original documents, forming one section entitled "History";
 likewise combine any sections entitled "Acknowledgements", and any sections
 entitled "Dedications".
 You must delete all sections entitled "Endorsements."
\layout Standard

6.
 COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
\layout Standard

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
 released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
 License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in
 the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
 verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.
\layout Standard

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute
 it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this
 License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all other
 respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.
\layout Standard

7.
 AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS
\layout Standard

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and
 independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution
 medium, does not as a whole count as a Modified Version of the Document,
 provided no compilation copyright is claimed for the compilation.
 Such a compilation is called an "aggregate", and this License does not
 apply to the other self-contained works thus compiled with the Document,
 on account of their being thus compiled, if they are not themselves derivative
 works of the Document.
\layout Standard

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies
 of the Document, then if the Document is less than one quarter of the entire
 aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on covers that surround
 only the Document within the aggregate.
 Otherwise they must appear on covers around the whole aggregate.
\layout Standard

8.
 TRANSLATION
\layout Standard

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute
 translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
 Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special permission
 from their copyright holders, but you may include translations of some
 or all Invariant Sections in addition to the original versions of these
 Invariant Sections.
 You may include a translation of this License provided that you also include
 the original English version of this License.
 In case of a disagreement between the translation and the original English
 version of this License, the original English version will prevail.
\layout Standard

9.
 TERMINATION
\layout Standard

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except
 as expressly provided for under this License.
 Any other attempt to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document
 is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
 However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
 License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties
 remain in full compliance.
\layout Standard

10.
 FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
\layout Standard

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU
 Free Documentation License from time to time.
 Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but
 may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.
 See http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.
\layout Standard

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
 If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this License
 "or any later version" applies to it, you have the option of following
 the terms and conditions either of that specified version or of any later
 version that has been published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundatio
n.
 If the Document does not specify a version number of this License, you
 may choose any version ever published (not as a draft) by the Free Software
 Foundation.
\the_end
